JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Welcome, everyone.
I'd like to introduce you
to Tim Ferriss, author
of "The 4-Hour Workweek,"
"Body," and "Chef,"
hosts "The Tim Ferriss
Show," the number one rated
business podcast on iTunes,
and a serial investor.
I'm your host, Jordan Thibodeau.
So without further ado, let's
give Tim a nice welcome.
[APPLAUSE]
So Tim, what has been one of the
most important stoic teachings?
TIM FERRISS: So
stoic philosophy is
in essence the
operating system that I
use for making better
decisions, or try to use.
It's very old-- 2,000-plus
years old in various iterations.
And I would say that you
can start in many places,
whether it's Marcus Aurelius'
"Meditations," or the "Moral
Letters to Lucilius,"
the letters of Seneca.
Cato is particularly
interesting to me.
And one of the lessons that
I try to implement in my life
comes from Cato.
Cato was considered by
many the perfect stoic.
I'm sure he was not
perfect, as none of us are.
But he would regularly,
for instance,
wear mismatched clothing
in the high-profile arenas
where that was frowned
upon so that he could train
himself to be ashamed
only of the things
worth being ashamed of.
So he would practice
doing things
that would earn him the scorn,
superficial scorn, of others.
And the form that that can
take can be very, very simple.
And you can do in
very small ways.
But I have what I would call,
for instance-- and this is
a ridiculous example, but
that's the whole point--
I have my party pants, which
are these ridiculous pants that
look straight out
of "Austin Powers."
And I will occasionally
wear those not to the extent
that I would offend some
guest-- like dinner host
in some-- I don't
want to make enemies.
That's not the goal.
But I'll wear it
in a place where
I know that I'm going to
get these sideways glances
from everyone to try
to inoculate myself
against that type of
superficial attachment
to what others think.
For a while, recently,
I was wearing
what I could best describe as
like a creepy porn 'stache.
It was a very ill-advised
half-grown mustache
that looked terrible.
It really did look-- it was
like "Chester the Molester."
It was terrible.
And I wore that around for
a good week and a half.
And every time I would put
up a photograph on Instagram
or wherever it was, they'd be
like please, for god's sake,
take that thing off your face.
And it was just an exercise.
It was yet another exercise.
And there are many
different ways to do this.
But I think that that would
be one that comes to mind--
is regularly practicing things
that you feel embarrassed
by, but shouldn't-- that have
no grander importance whatsoever
so that when you train
yourself to not be embarrassed
by the small things, then
when it comes time to make big
decisions, stand up
for something larger,
you will have the
training that you need.
And this is not
necessarily stoic.
But I think it's Archilochus.
I'm not brushed up on my
ancient pronunciation.
But this is military.
This is a military context.
But it was we do not rise
to the level of our hopes.
We fall to the level
of our training.
So what I like about stoicism
is that it offers practical ways
of practicing this.
The second would be practicing
your worst-case scenario.
This is very similar.
So [INAUDIBLE] a
larger meta example.
Seneca-- I think it's "On
Fasting and Festivals" or "On
Festivals and Fasting."
I think it's Letter
13, actually,
in the "Moral
Letters to Lucilius,"
which I reread all the time.
Clearly, you can tell.
And to set aside a
certain number of days,
say, each month, which
I do, during which
you will be satisfied with the
cheapest and scantest affair,
wear the roughest of clothing,
et cetera, asking yourself
all the while is this the
condition that I so feared?
So practicing poverty,
which would then
empower you to make
decisions because you
know the worst-case
scenario isn't that bad.
And for that reason, among
other reasons we can get into,
I do one three-day
fast every month.
I do one seven- to 10-day fast
every one to two quarters.
And there are other things
that I do on top of that.
But those are a few
that come to mind.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Excellent.
In your podcast, you've
talked about the monkey brain.
Can you explain what that is?
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
The monkey brain or monkey mind
is, I think, inside all of us
in some capacity.
It's this incessant internal
dialogue, or maybe not
even a dialogue.
Maybe it's just some stern
or irritating roommate
that you have in your head.
And we can all think back
to, say, elementary school.
I remember there was
this kid in my class.
He was always misbehaving.
And I remember at
one point, he got up.
It was like third grade.
And the teacher suddenly froze.
And we turned around.
And he had a fork over his head.
And he said I am the
master of the universe.
And he stabbed an
electrical outlet
and just got, like,
blown backwards.
And then there was this
kid who would walk over
and he would always-- he
would build a building out
of construction blocks.
And then inevitably, it would
fall over when it got too tall.
And then he'd just
lay down and cry.
And I think that
as we get older,
we learn to not do those
things because you'd
be put in a straitjacket.
But as a result,
they're internalized.
So all day, we're walking
around with some version
or a combination of
all of those things.
And the context in which
I probably brought it up,
the monkey mind,
was as it relates
to my morning journaling.
So I do regularly journal.
Sometimes I do what would
be considered morning pages.
Other times, I use something
called the Five Minute Journal,
which we could talk about.
But the goal is not
to write, per se.
I'm not doing it
for someone else.
I am simply capturing
my monkey mind.
It's litany of complaints
or insecurities on paper
so that it's not caught on
repeat for the rest of the day.
I'm simply giving it a
two-dimensional prison
or playpen so that I can
then move on with my day
and hit mute at least for
a brief period of time
on those things.
But I think that if you want
to be less reactive, to be
the author of your own life
or business career, whatever
it might be, you have to
be able to do deep work
and think long-term
and rationally.
And for all of those
things, you need
to get very good at
identifying where you're
being overly reactive to
thoughts, to external factors
outside of your control,
whatever it might be.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: That ties
back to the Five Minute Journal.
TIM FERRISS: It does.
The Five Minute
Journal is-- it's
a journal that was
created by a reader
of "The 4-Hour
Workweek," actually,
for those who have
read the book.
It was their muse--
so one of their cash
flow-focused businesses in the
context of lifestyle design.
But you take 2 and 1/2
minutes or so in the morning
and then again at night.
And so one is effectively a
focusing and planning exercise.
There's also a
gratitude component,
which I think is very
critical for those of us who
are driven Type A achievers.
It's very easy to constantly
be focused on the future
and just to hit
pause for a second.
I've heard someone
say that depression
is an obsession with
the past and anxieties,
and an obsession
with the future.
Well, if you look
at achievers, they
tend to be very future-focused.
And as soon as they hit
a goal, they're like,
don't have time to
celebrate this small win.
This isn't good enough-- bigger,
bigger, better, et cetera.
And that is a pattern that can
be very self-destructive even
if you rack up a lot of
wins at the same time.
So the gratitude component
is extremely critical.
That takes but 2 and
1/2 minutes each day.
And it also helps to
identify your focal points
or your priorities so that
when inevitably that 10% that's
left of the monkey mind pops
up to dance in front of you
and distract you
from your objectives
you set out for the day,
you can return to that.
And then at the end
of the day, it's
basically a performance review.
And I find it incredibly helpful
and a lot of ROI for the time
invested.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Excellent.
So it seems like it gives you
a degree of mental clarity.
TIM FERRISS: Yeah, it does.
And I think that
what separates--
if I think about
my podcast, I've
interviewed 100 to 150
world-class performers
across every possible
demand imaginable-- sports,
entertainment,
politics, art, chess,
it just goes on and on-- that
the difference between somebody
who's good, like
let's just call it
the top quartile
of the population
in their chosen
field, and the top 1%,
it's the degree
to which they can
focus to determine their
goals and maintain that focus.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Gotcha.
TIM FERRISS: It's one of the
largest distinguishing factors.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Now, with people
who've achieved such success in
their careers or in athletics
or whatever, what can people do
to maintain their humbleness?
TIM FERRISS: Humility,
I think, is not
too tough to maintain if you
create the proper environments.
And I'm not a huge fan of
self-control or willpower.
I think it's really overrated.
It's like, oh, well, fat people
are fat because they just
lack the willpower.
It's like, no.
That's a stupid, lazy answer,
or just a shite observation.
If you look at
behavior modifications,
they just have
lack of incentives.
They have lack of
social accountability.
Maybe they don't have the
information that they need.
And you can create environments
in which you can train.
And I come back to this over
and over and over again.
But there are few things I
think that are very helpful.
One is memento
mori, so remembering
that you're going
to die, and putting
that-- it's also very stoic.
I'm somewhat obsessed about
death, even to a degree
that I find weird.
But memento mori-- so
constantly revisiting death
and realizing it forces
you to put your life
in a broader context of
civilization and the world.
And I think that in and of
itself is very corrective.
And how do you
practice or develop
that sense of memento mori?
I have a quote on
my refrigerator
that's from Marcus Aurelius.
And "Meditations," by the way,
is effectively a war journal.
While Marcus Aurelius, who
was the most powerful man
on the planet at the
time-- emperor of Rome--
was on a military campaign.
And he would write these entries
to do exactly this-- to remind
himself that he was just a
man, he was going to die,
it would all be dust.
And it sounds depressing
until you realize the clarity
and lack of waste that comes
from constantly repeating
those types of things.
Then you have the memento
homo-- probably getting
the pronunciation off.
But that is remembering that
you are just a man or a person.
So we don't have-- those in
this room probably are not
going to commission,
like Julius Caesar,
someone to hold a laurel
wreath over your head
while you're doing a procession
like the Roman triumph
to say you're just a man, you're
just a man, you're not a god.
But the way that you can
very easily humble yourself
is to always try to
be the weakest person
in the room in something.
Every day, you should
be the weakest person
in the room at some point,
whether that is in a meeting,
whether that is in a sport,
whether that is in a gym,
whether that is
in a chess match.
It doesn't matter.
But I always try to be the
weakest person in the room.
And I remember when I was 15,
I had my first time overseas
for an extended period.
I was in Japan for a year.
And I ended up
being a judo player.
I was competing in judo.
And the high school
that I went to
was not particularly
strong in judo.
But I was the big fish
in the little pond.
And I got very high and mighty.
I thought I was
just the cat's meow.
And I wasn't too overt about it.
But I was very sort of satisfied
with how well I was doing.
Went to my first
tournament and I
got demolished in seven
seconds by this guy who weighed
40 pounds less than I did.
Like Ippon Gachi-- that was it.
I was done.
And I got up.
I'm like, I'm fine.
They're like no,
you're the loser.
You're done.
You are done.
And I was so demoralized.
And I was the only white
guy in the tournament.
And it was kind of-- so
there were a lot of people
just hoping that they would
be able to kind of, like, was
a finger and laugh.
And we love Japan.
But it's like I get it--
a very homogeneous place.
So I ended up going after that
to a cram school for judo,
like a juku-- they have it for
all sorts of things-- at night.
And I want to Tokai
University's judo cram schools.
So Tokai University produces
gold medalists in the Olympics.
They're really, really tough.
So I went in.
And I was 15 at the time.
And I got just annihilated
by 12-year-olds-- talk
about embarrassing.
If you can try to flash back
to high school and you're
like [INTENTIONALLY MUMBLES].
And you're like a
sophomore in high school
getting killed by sixth
graders, seventh graders.
It's so embarrassing,
including women.
I was getting torn to pieces.
And I got trashed for
three or four months.
And I was like, wow,
I don't feel like I'm
making a lot of progress.
My endurance is getting
a little bit better.
And went to a tournament
that had the same competitors
as the previous term and just
walked through everybody,
just steamrolled because I
had a better cohort group.
I was the weakest in the room.
As long as you're trending
in the right direction,
it doesn't matter
if you're losing.
And so that would
be one approach.
Just every day, schedule it.
Plan it.
Be the weakest person in
the room in some capacity.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: You
have multiple people
trying to reach out to
you and contact you.
How do you manage
all those requests?
TIM FERRISS: I suppose
the short answer
is I don't manage
all those requests.
The irony of "The 4-Hour
Workweek," among many others,
is that my systems have to be
100 times better now than they
were when the book came
out because if you look
at my assistants and the
various embed channels
that we have or try to
avoid, but nonetheless have,
it's 1,500 to 2,000 direct
messages of some type every day
that hit me and my team.
That's excluding all the tweets,
Facebook mentions, Google+,
et cetera.
It's ignoring all of that.
So the way that I try to
think about handling that
is having rules set in advance.
So for instance, if we were
to take a corporate or startup
analogy, you don't
want to decide
how to respond to a
crisis when a crisis hits.
If you think you're
going to have a disaster,
you want to role-play it out
and say, all right, if a,
then b, c, or d.
If x, then y and z.
And you have a plan in place
so that-- and this all ties
back together-- if disaster
strikes, you are not reactive.
You don't make a
impulsive decision
that could destroy a lot of
what you've worked to achieve,
including your reputation.
So with email, I have
very particular rules.
And I will block
out periods of time.
For instance, I'm
going to take July--
and I did this about
two years ago in Bali.
There's actually a good piece
in "Inc" magazine called
"The 4-Hour Reality
Check" that's
not a bad read about this.
But I'm blocking out July to
focus on writing and deep work
in that capacity.
So I have to set up systems
and rules in advance
so that I don't have to be on
email or calendar or phone,
which is what I did for
a month in Indonesia.
I'm going to do
this time overseas.
And so the important thing
is deciding on your policies.
And I've realized for
myself that I do moderation
very poorly, whether it's
caffeine, booze-- if I'm on,
I am on.
And if I am off, I am off.
So that is why I decided
to take a startup
vacation-- effectively
retirement--
as of about nine months ago.
I realized-- this is
just one example--
I was drowning in email intros
to founders and cold emails
and pitches and this,
that, and the other thing.
Whether I do 100 deals
a year, 10 deals a year,
one deal a year, if I
have to filter and look
at all of the inbound
to make decisions,
it's almost the exact
same amount of work.
Does that make sense?
So trying to pare
back in moderation--
it's a fool's errand.
You just end up doing
the same amount of work.
So I will decide am I doing
speaking engagements or not,
period?
Am I doing, say,
interviews or not, period?
Am I writing for any other
sites whatsoever, because I get
hit by people who
want me to write
for this and this
new startup, to write
for such and such
established media that's
trying to branch into whatever.
No.
The answer for that
is absolutely not
because I'm focusing
on my own writing.
And the Five Minute
Journal-- all these things
help to allow you to
practice that focus.
And then there are tools.
So there's a very small subset--
let's just call it 1% to 2%--
that get me closer to sort
of the mountain that I see
in the distance which represents
the goals I've already set
for myself.
And I'll have metrics.
I'll have KPIs where I
keep performance indicators
for these things,
like podcast growth.
And a great commencement
speech by Neil Gaiman everybody
should check out called "Make
Good Art"-- it's fantastic.
But he talks a lot about this.
And then the question is what
are the tools or policies,
tactics, that help with
managing that subset that I
am going to tackle?
I use tools like
ScheduleOnce for scheduling--
allows other people
to find times
and to avoid the back and forth.
If you guys want to
see something that'll
be painfully humorous,
you can check out
I think it's "Let's Get Drinks"
in I believe "The New Yorker."
Somebody could look that up.
You'll be like, that is my life.
I remember there
was a tweet that I
saw recently which was--
I'm paraphrasing-- adulthood
is saying sorry for the late
reply until one of you dies.
It's like that is a
sad state of affairs.
So I'll use ScheduleOnce.
I'll use a tool
called Boomerang,
which allows me to not
just automate followup
reminders if I don't
hear back from someone,
but to set parameters,
and secondly-- this
is very underused as a
feature-- to send in the future.
So the way you train
someone, just like training
a dog or a manatee
or anything else,
the same stuff-- there's a
great book called "Don't Shoot
the Dog" that you should all
read about for training humans,
also-- is you can extend the
time between which you respond
to certain types of people.
And it just teaches them
that you are not on IM.
Email is not messenger for you.
So sending in the
future-- very helpful.
Processing email-- I
use Gmail offline a lot.
So I'll process email,
batch process email offline,
so that I don't have the
psychological trauma of feeling
like I'm doing whack-a-mole
where I send off two emails
and I get five back and I'm just
like, I can't, I'm drowning,
I can't do this.
And then you're like I should
go watch "Game of Thrones"
or whatever you use
to procrastinate.
To avoid that, batch processing
offline-- hugely valuable.
And there are other
things that I do.
I'll give one more, which
is if you send an email,
try to think of
if-then scenarios.
So the engineers in
the room will probably
do this naturally--
is thinking in terms
of scripts or algorithms.
But if you send an
email-- you're like, hey,
can you meet up next
week, and that's
the end of the email,
that's a bad email.
So can you meet up next week?
I suggest this
time or this time.
This is my first choice.
If you can't do
those times, please
suggest two or three
times in this time frame
that works for you.
Let's set it for 30 minutes--
being really specific.
It takes an extra 30
seconds on the front end
and it will save you 20
exchanges on the back end.
So just always thinking
is there an if-then line
that I should put in
this email before you
hit Send saves a lot of time.
But I try to move as much
as possible off of email
to things like Slack, Dropbox,
et cetera, whenever possible.
It was designed for emergency
military communication,
not for what we use
it for currently.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Right, right.
So most of us here
in this audience
have listened to your podcast.
And it's been wildly successful.
What do you think drives
the success of the podcast?
TIM FERRISS: I think the
podcast is successful
because I knew I had a
guaranteed audience of one.
And that means I was
scratching my own itch.
In the case of whenever I try to
design something for a market,
it fails.
Whenever I just do something
that I couldn't find
for myself, then it does fine.
It seems to be the trend.
So I'm scratching my own itch.
And what I was missing was
the long-form fly on the wall
conversation, but also the
tactics and the really detailed
nitty-gritty how-to stuff.
And all the books
came about this way.
I was looking for something,
looking for something,
looking for something.
And I was just like, fuck,
I'll just write it myself.
This is too annoying
because I would
gather all these resources.
I'd be like, OK, I will
at least compile this.
And in the case
of the podcast, I
wanted to try to spot the
patterns in all these experts.
And I was already doing this
type of prep work for the books
by ferreting these people out.
And it just so
happens that I would
have these dinners or
drinks with folks who
are the best at what they do.
And I would think afterwards--
usually two or three
glasses of wine in-- be
like, man, this is so good.
I wish I could just share this.
Why don't I just record this?
And then-- if any of you heard
the first episode-- so sloppy
with Kevin Rose because
I was so nervous even
though he was a close friend--
still is a close friend.
And he was just busting
my balls the whole time
because that's what close
guy friends do to each other.
And so I just was
drinking way too much.
And I remember we recorded
the first podcast.
And I'd committed to doing six.
This is important.
I can mention why.
But I was skipping through
the audio just checking
on the quality.
And it's like two hours long,
two and a half hours long.
And about an hour in, I was so
anxious, for whatever reason.
And I was like, well, Kevin,
I want to be respectful
of your time, da-da-da-da-da-da.
And then I was like,
all right, whatever.
Click.
Forward like an hour, and the
same exact phrase came up.
And it was like,
(SLURRING) well,
Kevin, I just want to be
respectful of your time.
And I was like, oh my
god, this is terrible.
[LAUGHTER]
And I had this
lip-smacking tick.
And all this stuff was
like, the shame, the shame.
And I committed to six
because if you only do one,
you're going to quit,
or most people will.
So you commit to six.
And the question I asked
myself because the success--
you asked what
makes it successful.
There are actually a bunch
of questions baked into that.
There's what makes the
product something that
could be successful?
There's what makes it
something that spreads?
But there's also why
it survived, which
is maybe the better question.
If I had tried to do
something fancier,
like fill in the
blank-- something that
is produced really well,
like "Freakonomics Radio,"
I don't have the experience
and the resources.
I would have become overwhelmed
and I would have quit.
So rule number one is
if you want something
to be successful, you can't
quit after two episodes.
You actually have
to get to a point
where your learning
curve hockey sticks.
And I believe for my format,
for podcasts in general,
that's at least six episodes.
And so the questions
that I think
have allowed it
to succeed for me
and for me to feel
successful doing it
because I enjoy it is number
one, how do I keep this fun?
Number two, what would it
look like if it were simple?
I ask myself that question
more and more all the time now.
What would this
look like if it were
dead simple, stupid simple?
OK, Ferriss, I know
you like feature creep.
I know you love
writing 700-page books.
But let's hold back
on that for a second.
What would this look
like if it were easy?
And try that first.
So I think those
are a few things.
But it's very, very,
very, very tactic-rich--
routines, habits, what
is the book that you've
gifted the most to other
people, what does the first 60
minutes of your day look like--
specifically, exact times.
You have coffee?
How do you make your coffee?
What brand do you like?
Why?
And just I try and harness that
OCD in a way that is helpful
instead of making my
relationships implode--
something like that.
So I think that's been it.
But scratching your
own itch-- it's
like, if you have a
guaranteed market of one,
i.e. yourself, you're ahead of
99% of the entrepreneurs here.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Right.
Now, you've done almost like,
what, 100-plus podcasts now?
TIM FERRISS: Probably
150 episodes.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: So now you
have a wide enough sample
size to see of these
successful people,
are you seeing
commonalities that
is leading to their
success in their careers?
TIM FERRISS: I think there
are a few things come
to mind right away.
The first is-- now, this
could be a selection bias.
Maybe I'm choosing
people who are
more prone to have certain
things in common than others
or I'm attracted to people
in a way that biases this.
But at least 80%
of the people I've
interviewed across all domains
have a daily meditation
practice of some type.
Certainly, if you want to
cut down on monkey mind,
the first step is just
to become aware of it
and kind of observe it,
like a really shitty comedy
in your head.
So what is my brain doing?
This doesn't make any sense.
And 20 minutes in the morning
is a great way to do that.
And I'm not particularly in
favor of one versus another.
I found TM,
transcendental meditation,
to be very helpful
because it's presented
in a very secular way.
And I find the white
noise of a mantra--
the word mantra bugs me so
much, but a word that you
repeat over and over
again-- to be very helpful.
But Vipassana-- there's
a good book called
"Waking Up" by Sam Harris.
Sam Harris is PhD
in neuroscience.
He's been on the podcast
and talked about this.
Tara Brach-- also fantastic.
80%-plus have some type
of meditation practice,
even if they don't
call it meditation.
So I've, for
instance, interviewed
Amelia Boone-- incredible
endurance athlete,
the most successful female
endurance athlete in obstacle
course racing in the world.
But also in 2012 at the
World's Toughest Mudder,
I think it was about
1,200 competitors
and probably 90% male.
She came in second
place out of everybody.
That's a 24-hour race.
And she is super tough.
And she said, well,
I don't really
have a meditation practice.
And I was like what you
do when you're running?
And she's like, I either
listen to one track
over and over again, or I
sing one track to myself
over and over again.
I was like, well, that
sound a whole hell
of a lot like meditation to me.
[LAUGHTER]
And then Arnold
Schwarzenegger, for instance--
this was a really cool example.
He does everything 100% Arnold.
When he goes, he really goes.
And he did-- I think, it was
transcendental meditation
for a year.
And then he felt like he hit a
certain plateau in the benefits
and he stopped.
But he said that the benefits
persisted for decades-- very,
very cool idea.
The prospect of that
is very exciting.
So meditation would be one.
Two-- of the males,
and we could theorize
as to why this is the
case-- but of the males,
a high percentage
of the interviewees
over the age of 50
skip breakfast-- very
high percentage.
Wim Hof, General Stanley
McChrystal, tick, tick, tick,
tick-- there's a long
list-- Pavel Tsatsouline,
the Russian who effectively
brought kettlebells to the US.
I remember I asked him-- my
usual sound check question is
what'd you have for breakfast?
And he was like, breakfast?
Coffee.
I was like we need
more for a sound check.
He's like Tim, I like
to keep it simple.
I was like, ah, all
right, all right.
Pavel was awesome-- one
of my favorite episodes.
Let's see-- I find just as
interesting as the patterns,
I find the differences
reassuring because, of course,
I think we're pattern
recognition machines.
So I'm looking for the secrets.
It's like, OK, just net-net,
what do 80% of these people
have in common so
I can just do that?
That's my recipe.
And then I'll have
everything that I
want-- great-- do everything
that I want, be happy.
Oh, that'd be fantastic.
But what I've
realized over time is
that what appears to be the case
because you have-- at first,
I was interviewing all these
people and they're like,
I wake up at 4:30
in the morning.
Like Jocko Willink, the most
decorated special operations
commander from the Iraq War--
he was like wake up at 4:30.
And I had a string of about
10 of these interviews
where they're like, I wake up
at 4:30, I wake up at 5:00.
And I was like oh, god, I
don't want to wake up at 4:30.
[LAUGHTER]
For me, I'm waking up at the ass
crack of dawn is, like, 8:30.
That's a major effort for me
because I go to bed so late.
And I've historically done all
my best writing between 11:00
PM and 4:00 or 5:00 AM.
And then I had a few folks
who are very late night.
And I was like, oh, thank god.
Whew, that was close.
And what I realized is--
and there's a quote--
I'm going to massacre it, but
I'm going to paraphrase here--
that I think is WH
Auden-- A-U-D-E-N--
I might be getting
the last name wrong--
but that routine in the
intelligent man-- person--
routine in an intelligent
man is a sign of ambition.
And I think that
what is important
is not having a
specific routine.
It's having a routine.
That's it, like you
have a routine that
allows you to preserve
your decision-making
and your creativity
hit points-- sorry,
Dungeons & Dragons--
for the things
that actually matter so
that you're not waking up
and every morning deciding
what to have for breakfast.
You're not waking
up every morning
and maybe deciding what to
wear-- Steve Jobs, et cetera.
I have quite a few friends who
wear the same thing effectively
every day.
So in what ways can you preserve
your decision-making budget,
your creativity
budget, for the things
that you are uniquely good
at and that really matter?
And the answer seems to
have a lot of routines.
And you can have
your own routines.
But what's important is
that you have a routine
or routines that you stick
to for periods of time.
That seems to be-- and there
are many, many, many, many, many
different routines.
But those would be a few.
A lot of them-- the majority
of them-- are insomniacs.
So take heart.
Just because you're insomniac
doesn't make you successful,
but seems to be a symptom
or a common side effect
of a lot of their behavior.
And then scratching their
own itch-- almost all of them
scratch their own itch.
And this is actually
super important.
I think there's a lot of rah-rah
motivational speaker business
advice out there that
is utter horseshit.
And I think one of the
biggest delusions, illusions,
or just hoaxes is
optimism, think big,
the passion's
going to drive you,
like that's how the people
who are really successful
are successful.
That might be the story you
read about in the magazines
because it makes for a fun
hero's journey type of story.
But the people
that I've been most
impressed by ask themselves
all the time, what
is the worst-case scenario?
They're budgeting
for the downside.
So in other words,
they're not using optimism
to allow them to take action.
They're not just,
like, you know what?
I'm going to jump off the cliff
and grow wings on the way down,
or whatever the
cliche is that you
might find on a calendar
in "Office Space."
No.
They're saying the way that I do
things that other people think
are high-risk or other
people think are risky,
dangerous, whatever it might
be, is because I write down
the worst-case
scenarios, ask myself
what could I do to mitigate
these things from happening.
And I ask myself if they
happen, what can I do
to get back to where I am now?
And I realize these "risky"
things are not risky at all.
They're totally reversible.
They're just speed bumps if
anything goes wrong, really,
in the grand scheme of things.
And so they get
a lot of at-bats.
They're really good at
capping the downside.
Branson has said this.
As much as he has a
lot of rah-rah stuff,
you drill down into
it, it's like he's
really good at deciding
what is the most I can lose
if I do x, what is the most
time that I can lose if we do y,
and then making decisions based
on that sort of lost limit,
if that makes sense.
So that's very heartening
because I've never been--
I would like to say I'm a
follow my passion kind of guy.
I get excited about things.
I want to scratch my own itch.
But I think that
the real toolkit
is getting really good at asking
is this the condition that I so
feared?
What if?
And once you sort of neuter
the worst-case scenarios
and depower them, you're
like, oh, yeah, this is fine.
This is totally fine.
It's not any riskier than just
investing and watching a new TV
series on Netflix-- like
maybe get three episodes in,
you're like damn
it, I can't believe
I watched three
hours of this crap.
You choose another series.
It's not the end of the world.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Right.
Right.
No, it's true.
TIM FERRISS: "Narcos"--
watch "Narcos."
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Very good.
Can't wait for season two.
TIM FERRISS:
(WHISPERING) So good.
Oh, that was such a
head fake at the end.
But I'm kind of happy.
Sorry, I digress.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: I know.
TIM FERRISS:
"Billions"-- also good.
But I digress again.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: No.
When I saw "Narcos,"
I didn't actually--
like some of the things
that happened, I was like,
did this really happen?
TIM FERRISS: Oh, yeah.
I've spent a good amount of time
in Colombia and in Medellin,
on a road that was
called the Road of Death
because Pablo
Escobar's henchmen used
to drop dead bodies down
ravines on either side
and they would just
be piled with bodies.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: That's
really hard to transition back.
TIM FERRISS: So next time
you're stuck on 101 in traffic
and you're cursing the
gods, be like, well,
at least the sides of the road
aren't littered with bodies--
could be a lot worse.
Could be a lot worse.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
So period-- break.
TIM FERRISS: Period, semicolon.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Next transition.
TIM FERRISS: Don't
use semicolons.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: I've seen
many careers ended on this.
TIM FERRISS: Or em dashes.
I love em dashes-- so lazy.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Now, are there plans
to write a book
about these podcasts
and the experiences you've had?
TIM FERRISS: I've
been toying with it.
I put some feelers
out on social media
to see if people will be
interested because usually,
when I end up doing
something, it's
when it's less painful to
do it than to not do it.
So the insomnia for
me-- I'm much better
at getting asleep, much
better at falling asleep.
But usually when I end up
pulling a trigger on something,
it's when it keeps me up for
four or five nights straight
and just the ideas are coming.
And I'm like god,
stop, make it stop.
I want to go to sleep.
But it's that
excitement good stuff,
which is how "The 4-Hour
Workweek" happened.
It was waking up and
writing down stuff.
And like let me go to sleep,
get it out of my head,
I want to go to sleep.
And so for the last
week or two, the idea
of sort of distilling the
patterns and learnings
and the stuff that was
not in the podcasts,
also-- like the experiments
that I've done afterwards
or in between or other
interactions I've
had with these
guests-- there are
a lot of just really actionable,
awesome habits and tools
that I've actually tested.
Well, let me take a poll.
So how many people here have
listened to the podcast?
All right.
Of those people,
how many would be
interested in a distilled
synopsis of the best
lessons learned in the podcast?
All right.
So it's like a 60%, 70%.
Yeah.
I think there's a decent chance.
I just think it would be--
and I'll tell you why also.
It's not the reason
you might expect.
What I suffer from
most, what pains
me the most about the
podcast, is the embarrassment
of riches that comes out of
a 2 and 1/2 hour conversation
because I do-- I have one of
these coming out in a week-- I
don't have time to actually
digest and reflect on all
the stuff that I'm putting out.
I do as much as I can.
But I just don't
have the bandwidth.
And now I've done 150.
I'm like-- and part
of me's like, I don't
need to interview anybody else.
This is enough.
And I want to do it
because I enjoy it.
But I'm like if you
can't figure out
how to improve any aspect of
your life from these 150 people
across 100 different
disciplines,
you're an idiot-- like Tim
Ferriss talking to myself.
So it's like go back and review.
Review, idiot.
You've done tests before.
Life is the test.
Start studying, or you're
going to have a panic attack.
So if I were to go back and
try to distill all this stuff,
it would give me the
incentive and opportunity
to do exactly that, to go
back and actually pull out
all these things and be like,
oh my god, that's right.
The most successful people
in the business and investing
realm recommended
"Sapiens," this book
on evolutionary
biology, effectively.
It's like, that's weird.
Oh, yeah, I forgot about that.
Maybe I should read "Sapiens."
Fill in the blank.
There are so many
examples like that.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: So it
should be done by July, right?
[LAUGHTER]
TIM FERRISS: Alas, I'm
fast at many things.
Book writing is not one of them.
But it certainly would
not take as long as some
of the soul-crushing
projects that I've
allowed myself to expand from,
like "The 4-Hour Chef" was
supposed to 250 pages.
I ended up 670 after
250 pages were cut.
It's like, what was I thinking?
Like oh, yeah, I'll do 30%
of the photographs myself.
How hard could that?
Oh, yeah, turns
out photography--
really tough to do well.
[CHUCKLING]
So I'm trying to learn
from my mistakes.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Where do you
see Tim going in the next five
years?
TIM FERRISS: Tim in five years?
Tim sees Tim-- this
is, like, Hulkspeak.
I see in the next
five years-- well,
let me pause before
I answer that
to say I've never had reliable
five-year plans, 10-year plans,
or otherwise.
And I treat my entire life as a
series of two-week experiments
and six-month projects
because-- and maybe this
is just the way I cope with
life and decision-making--
but I feel like if you make
a five- or 10-year plan
that you can reliably
hit, almost by definition,
you have to set a
plan that is below
your current capabilities.
If you're an A student, you
have to set a C-plus plan for it
to be 100% achievable.
And I think it's
just a great way
to paint yourself into a
very unattractive corner.
So two-week experiments,
six-month projects
is kind of how I
view my whole life.
But if I had to guess, I would
say, five years-- less hair,
better gymnastics, which
is my new thing, one
of my new things.
But larger picture,
I see myself doing
the podcast or some
iteration of it,
just deconstructing experts
and world-class performers
on a much, much larger scale.
I think it'll be
10-- I think and want
it to be 10 times bigger
without sacrificing
the nitty-gritty, the nerdiness,
or going into the details.
It's like if I want to talk
about exogenous ketones-- which
by the way, internet, are not
androgynous ketones-- exogenous
ketones outside the
body with Dom D'Agostino
and talk about Navy SEALs
and rebreathers and all
this geeky shit for
an hour and a half,
that's what I'm going to do.
And if I'm having fun,
hopefully other people will.
And I think that will continue
to be a component because
whether or not
I'm publishing it,
that's what I'm doing, anyway.
So I'd like to-- but
by doing it publicly,
I force myself to get better.
It's a strong incentive
to refine the blade.
I think that there's a
chance I'll have a family.
We'll see about that stuff.
Want to have a conversation
about my thoughts on marriage
and relationships, that's
a whole separate thing that
requires a lot more tequila.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Or
maybe a "4-Hour Workweek"
on raising [INAUDIBLE].
TIM FERRISS: That's a
whole separate thing.
"4-Hour Parent" not
coming any time soon.
[LAUGHTER]
Somebody was like, what about
"The 4-Hour Relationship"?
I'm like, what is that, a
guide to one-night stands?
That's a best-case scenario.
Feel like other people
have written that book--
don't need to do it.
So I think five
years from now, I
hope to be better
at simplifying.
I think I'm good, but
I know I can be better.
I would like to-- this is
the first time in a long time
that I've ever said this-- I
want to still be doing what
I'm doing with the podcast.
I'm just really loving it.
And with books,
if anybody-- well,
I know there are people
in the audience who
have written books.
And I'm not going to have
anybody confess their sins now.
But it's like you
get through a book--
and I remember I was 90%
done with "The 4-Hour Body"
and I was talking
to this author.
I'm like, god, I'm
so bored of this.
Oh my god, I can't stand
rereading these chapters.
I'm 90% done.
I'm almost there.
He goes, oh congratulations.
You only have 50% left.
And I was like, oh
god, you're so right.
And it's just so painful to
give birth to these things.
It's like crowning with
Tony Robbins' head.
That sounds terrible.
Tony, I love you.
You know that.
But it's just like an
image of birthing--
JORDAN THIBODEAU: I would
have preferred "Total Recall"
with Arnold.
TIM FERRISS: Or Arnold.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Claudia or something.
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
So probably also painful
and kind of freaky.
So let that haunt
your dreams, everyone.
But with the podcast,
it's like when
I finish a good interview--
I did one with BJ Miller--
especially with someone
who's not widely known.
BJ Miller is a palliative
care and hospice
expert who's helped 1,000 people
or so transition to death.
And I finished.
And I was like, I feel so
much smarter after having
had this conversation.
And it just makes me so stoked
to do it again a week later.
So I want to be continuing
along those lines.
But I fully expect that
doors will close that I
think are currently open.
Doors will open that I don't
even know exist at the moment.
And that's part of the two-week
experiment, six-month project
plan.
So I'm OK with that.
And that's part of what makes
it exciting, quite frankly.
If I had a predictable plan, I
think I would run out of steam.
I wouldn't have the gasoline
or the electricity--
those of you who drive
Teslas-- to make it work.
And I don't think I take
myself too seriously.
But I hope to even
to a greater extent
be embracing and creating
absurdity in the world
and laughing at myself
because I think it's very
hard to get anything serious.
I think it's really hard to get
anything truly big and serious
done if you take
yourself too seriously--
so another reason why I do drunk
Q&As sometimes on the internet.
I'm not drunk right now.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
I can verify, yeah.
Final question--
let's say you had
a personal board of
directors and you
could put three people on
there, living and dead.
Who would those people be?
TIM FERRISS: Personal
board of directors,
three people-- I would say
first few that come to mind
would be Benjamin Franklin, the
merry prankster himself-- just
such a colorful character
and multi-faceted, really
incredible amateur
who was able to best
a lot of the professionals
because of that beginner
mind and lack of fear.
And I think that prankster-like
nature was very helpful.
The Walter Isaacson biography
of Franklin is so good.
It's so, so good.
It slows down for me in
the sort of last third.
But the beginnings
are so incredible.
They're really fantastic,
highly recommended.
Second-- Richard
Feynman probably,
the physicist, I guess from
Caltech, largely associated
with Caltech-- another
prankster-- just
another polymath/prankster
who used to in addition
to being world-class physicist
at Los Alamos and whatnot,
he became a safe breaker
just to annoy his superiors.
I wouldn't suggest this
in today's climate.
But he used to break into
these safes at Los Alamos,
take out the
top-secret documents,
and then put them on his boss's
desk and then close the safe
and just leave
them there to-- not
for extended periods of time,
but just to cause his boss
to have a complete
panic attack-- learned
to play the bongos-- had some
debate with an artist friend
and they got really fired up.
And he was like, well, I'm going
to teach you about science.
And he's like, well, all right.
Well, I'm going to
teach you how to paint.
So he got really into painting.
And he would go into strip
clubs to paint strippers.
I love this guy.
He was hilarious.
So I think Feynman,
although I might not
be able to get a word
in edgewise with him
and Franklin at the same table.
And then probably need some
serious, serious person
with some scars.
Not that they aren't
serious, but maybe
like a Marcus Aurelius type.
He was somebody who's had the
weight of the world literally
on their shoulders and has
had to make life and death
decisions.
Yeah, I think maybe a
Marcus Aurelius-- not sure
if I can get him to laugh much.
Maybe Musashi,
although he'd probably
kill all of us-- Musashi
Miyamoto, or Miyamoto Musashi.
Anyway, I'd say Marcus Aurelius.
I'll go with him.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Sounds good.
AUDIENCE: So thank you
so much for coming out.
I listen to your
podcast every week.
TIM FERRISS: Thank you.
AUDIENCE: And to
can actually see
a face that moves with
them is a neat experience.
TIM FERRISS: His head is so
much bigger than I though.
Do look like a bridge
troll-- I apologize for that.
AUDIENCE: I look
like a bridge troll?
TIM FERRISS: No, I look
like a bridge troll.
Oh, this is good.
We're getting
all-- limbering up.
I look like a bridge troll.
Look at this thing.
It's like a narwhal
or something.
All right.
Continue.
Sorry.
AUDIENCE: So I actually
have a Molly question,
which by the way, where is she?
TIM FERRISS: Molly?
AUDIENCE: Totally thought you
would've brought her with you.
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
So Molly my pup.
She's about 11 months old.
She is hiking right now.
So she's probably in the
Marin Headlands with a walker.
AUDIENCE: That was not
the full my question.
So I know she's 11 months old.
I actually have a
nine-month-old puppy,
so I follow a lot
of what you talk
about in your 5-Bullet
Fridays about her
and the toy that spits out food.
And I know that you do a lot
of testing experimentation
on yourself.
And I was just
wondering as you're
raising a puppy--
not inhumanely,
but do you do any kind of
testing experimentation
in her training?
TIM FERRISS: Right.
So testing experimentation
with Molly--
so in between the beatings--
you mentioned humane-- no.
No beatings, no beatings.
I'm testing all the time.
And it's not like
I'm putting her
in a Skinner box or anything.
But I think that it is a
great-- as with, I think,
many things in life-- like
how we do anything is how
we do everything, sometimes.
And I've found that getting
better at training Molly,
being attuned to her
needs, but also being
consistent with my
training and sequencing
the training in the right way--
so just in "The 4-Hour Chef"
when I talk about meta learning
and DSSS-- deconstruction,
selection, sequencing--
and I approach
dog training the same way, which
is really just animal training,
including humans.
So "Don't Shoot the Dog"--
great framework to start with.
And I think crate
training-- huge.
Even if you have an
older dog, I think
that clicker training for just
precision-- super helpful.
Karen Pryor's pretty
good for that, also.
And training for attention as a
prerequisite to all other skill
training-- and you can do that
very easily by, for instance,
getting a treat in one hand
and a clicker in the other.
And you hold the treat in
front of your dog's face
after they sit and then you
hold the treat out to the side.
Their eyes will travel with it.
Wait until their eyes
come back to your eyes.
And then you click the clicker
and you give them the treat.
And by doing that
in various ways,
you instill in them the habit
of constantly checking in
with you using eye contact.
And it makes everything
else-- come, sit, stay, down--
infinitely easier.
So thinking about how
to sequence those skills
is very fun.
Training for safety
first, trick second--
it's also also something I
looked very carefully at.
So I will do timed
stays, so like down stay.
And I'll do, like, she has
to do it for five minutes
and then I'll give her the
Beluga caviar of dog treats.
But to do that, you also
need a no-reward marker.
There are different
ways to do this.
So the reward marker
would be click, treat.
No-reward marker--
you can use uh-oh.
You can use different
types of verbal cues
to say you screwed
up, in other words.
And always getting
your dog-- sorry,
this is something
I'm really into-- so
using sit for please
is another thing that I
think is very helpful for safety
and as a prerequisite skill.
Any time she wants
anything, sit.
And that's like duh, OK.
Tell me something I don't know.
But I'll give you a variation
they might not think of.
Any time I open a
door, she sits first.
I go out next.
Then she looks at me.
And I go OK.
And she comes through the door.
This means your
dog never jumps out
of the car when you
open a hatchback
and gets hit by another
car-- will never happen.
If-- well, I shouldn't say
never-- never say never.
But you've just decreased
the likelihood infinitely.
So those are a few things
that I've played around with.
But I think the
sequencing of skills
is something that
most dog training
books do extremely poorly.
There's one book that I'm
hoping to acquire and just give
away for free, quite frankly.
It's really thin.
It's called "Command
Performance."
And it's a short compilation
of, like, two pages per behavior
put together by the
"Whole Dog Journal."
I'm sure it's based somewhere in
Northern California with a name
like that-- maybe Portland.
And I would start with that.
I think it'll go
a really long way.
There also some YouTube channels
that I think are helpful.
Kikopup-- K-I-K-O pup-- is one
that I've found very helpful.
But you run into the
same issue that you
run into with any type
of coach, like jiu-jitsu
is very problematic
for this, everything
is, where the
instructor walks in
and they just kind of decide
on the technique du jour
and then they teach you that.
But there's is no sequence.
There's no progression.
And with dogs or humans, if
you want the best result,
you need progression.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: [INAUDIBLE]
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
Long answer, but--
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Thanks.
I have a online question.
There's a lot of talk and
focus on human longevity.
What would you
actually recommend
people begin doing as
they approach their 40s
and beyond for a
minimum effective dose?
TIM FERRISS: If you're
40s, it's just too late.
Pick out your casket at Costco.
No, I jest.
I'm almost there myself.
The preface has to
be I am not a doctor,
I don't play one
on the internet,
this is not medical
advice, blah, blah, blah.
Talk to qualified professionals.
But if I were to-- or
maybe I am already--
if I were to pursue
increasing lifespan,
it would not be at the expense
of performance, number one.
I just enjoy
performance too much.
So it can't make me a sexless,
listless, depressed person,
which a lot of things
that extend lifespan
do-- like really, really
extended caloric restriction?
Yeah, have fun with that.
You'll wish you were
going to die sooner.
So I'm not going to do that.
But I do fasts to purge
precancerous cells.
By the time you're
40, almost everybody
will have what you could
consider precancerous
or cancerous cells.
What you don't want
is uncontrolled growth
of those cells.
And you can affect
that by understanding
the idiosyncrasies
of cancer metabolism.
But just to keep it simple,
you want to experience ketosis
and/or fasting for
semi-extended periods of time.
To me, that means at
least two to three days.
This is all a work in progress.
But it's based on
good literature.
So I would do, say-- I
do one three-day fast,
meaning water, per month.
Typically, I'll finish Thursday
dinner and then fast to Sunday
dinner.
And I may combine
that with-- this
is addressing cancer in part.
There are other mortality
causes, of course.
But I might use
hyperbaric oxygen
at, like, 2.5 atmospheres for
60 to 90 minutes three times
a week.
That's straight from
Dominic D'Agostino,
who I had on the
podcast, who's looked
at the use of
hyperbaric oxygen--
not only ketogenic
diet and fasting,
but also exogenous ketones,
like mixing up a powder
and drinking it like
Gatorade, and how
that can extend lifespan in
rats, in different species.
Other things I would
consider would--
if we're looking at pills,
because everybody asks me
about this, I would
say the medication
that has the most
support that I find
compelling would be metformin
right now, Glucophage.
So you could look up metformin.
There are side effects.
But I do know a lot of MDs who
are using it prophylactically
to decrease the
likelihood of dying
from a few different things.
Those would be first to mind.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Excellent.
TIM FERRISS: Don't drive a
car-- maybe number three.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Quick question--
how did you manage
to conquer your insomnia?
And what's the delta from a
four-hour body to now mental
interventions, physical ones?
And especially when it
comes to mental ones,
how did you figure out or
how could one figure out
what is keeping
them awake at night
or what makes their
sleep quality poor?
TIM FERRISS: Good question.
So insomnia-- what has
helped me the most-- there
are a few things.
I would say they're
the obvious ones.
But sometimes, the
obvious are important.
Let me address the
variable question first.
So there are controlled
studies where
you're looking for
a certain p-value
and you're looking
for a certain power
and you care a lot about
isolating variables.
If you care about results,
first and foremost,
you can still identify what
the primary movers are.
But I'll do it after the fact.
What I mean by
that is right now,
I have extreme elbow
tendinitis-- I actually
have fixed most
of it, but that's
a whole separate conversation.
And I did it by throwing maybe
six variables at it at a time.
And I do six at a time.
And then if it
helped, I could then--
because I cared first and
foremost about training--
I could remove variables and
see what the impact reversal
effects, et cetera, was.
So generally, I'm throwing
quite a bit at the problem
and then removing variables once
I have a winning combination.
For me, with insomnia, it was
replacing coffee with tea.
You can go with pretty
high-powered tea
or you can start with
decaf tea and actually take
like a Vivarin, caffeine
pill, cut it into quarters.
So now you have, let's
just say hypothetically,
25 milligrams a quarter.
And you can start decreasing
your caffeine intake
as a known quantity as
opposed to a cup of coffee
because it's highly,
highly variant.
So you can have decaf plus
100 milligrams first day.
And then you do
that for three days.
Next, you go to 75
milligrams, 50, 25.
That's one of the more effective
ways to decaf yourself.
That was one-- is then
limiting caffeine consumption
past about 5:00 PM.
But everybody's
heard that stuff.
Two that I found
tremendously impactful
that I did test in
isolation would be one,
some type of meditation in
the morning-- so 20 minutes,
let's say.
You could start with 10.
Use an app like Headspace,
which has been very
popular with a lot of my fans.
Meditation in the
morning depends a lot
on your cause of insomnia.
For me, it was the monkey mind.
It was just the machinery.
I couldn't get the cogs and
the wheels to stop moving.
I was still in
problem-solving mode.
Meditation in the morning,
reading fiction before bed
to take you into a storytelling
or story-consuming as opposed
to problem-solving mode, using
Flux or something like Flux
to change the light emitted
from your laptop or screen.
And last, I will-- how should
I do this-- a friend of mine
found microdosing with
psychedelics to be very
helpful in a
subhallucinogenic level
with perhaps psilocybin or
something along those lines.
I did a podcast
with James Fadiman--
talked a lot about this.
God forbid you think
I'm suggesting that.
I would never--
highly irresponsible.
But I don't make the news.
I just report the news.
[LAUGHTER]
JORDAN THIBODEAU: We're going
to do another online question.
You are known to be
an aggressive marketer
for "The 4-Hour Workweek."
How does 2016 Tim react to
2007 Tim's pitch and asks?
TIM FERRISS: That's
a good question.
2007 Tim?
2007 Tim was-- I
think he was tolerable
and for the-- probably
pushed a little too hard.
What he didn't know and
he couldn't have known
is really what really busy
actually means at a high level.
So I would, for instance,
shoot off an email to someone
to try to get them to look at
a 10-minute excerpt of the book
that I took ages
to put together.
And it's like this will
only take 10 minutes.
And then they would reply with,
like, I don't have the time.
And I'm like, how-- I didn't
say this, but in my head,
I'm just like, how can
you not have 10 minutes?
That's ridiculous.
And get very offended.
And now I get it.
Now I get it.
I get 1,500 email a day.
I get probably 100 unsolicited
books sent to me a week--
a week.
I took a photograph
of it at one point.
I took a stack.
And I'm just like if I
don't get back to you,
here's one reason
of probably 100 why.
And now I have much more
empathy and compassion
for that kind of thing.
So it's like if somebody doesn't
get back to me for months,
never attribute-- this is
another quote I find very
useful-- never
attribute to malice
what you can attribute
to incompetence.
But I would add to that,
never attribute to malice
what you can attribute to
incompetence or business.
Try not to take it personally.
Assume it's not personal.
Give yourself the benefit
of the doubt because you're
going to be the one who
takes the imaginary shrapnel
and carries it around with you
like acid in a vessel for weeks
on end if you hold grudges.
So I think he did
a pretty good job,
but could definitely be a
little overbearing at points.
But I don't know if that's
something I would change.
I don't know.
I'm too maybe
superstitious to think
that that would be-- I'm pretty
happy with how things worked
out.
So I'm not sure I would
have changed anything.
But I would have told
him to be a little nicer
to his joints-- very
aggressive with joints
and have suffered a
lot of pain and surgery
as a result of that.
That's about it.
AUDIENCE: Hi, Tim.
I have a question around
the experiments and projects
that you lead and
do on your own.
I'm wondering about vision.
So you may not have
a five-year plan.
But what is the
vision towards what
you orient towards on
your day-to-basis basis?
In terms of moment by
moment, who are you becoming?
And I'm wondering what would
that look like for you?
What's that vision?
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
Vision for me is a tricky
one unless I take it really
literally-- and it's like
in the "Dances with Wolves"
sweat lodge kind of
sense, which that's also
maybe a conversation
that requires
some level of other substances.
But in terms of who
I would like to be,
I saw this-- it's so cheesy--
and I have a better answer,
but I'll put it out
there anyway because I
do think about it
with Molly, as-- I saw
this billboard at one point.
It said be the person
your dog thinks you are.
And I was just like, that's
actually really good advice.
That's actually really,
really profound advice
if you kind of think about it.
But the vision I
think would be--
let me try to back into this.
So why build the podcast?
Why?
Why put out more books?
Why do these various things?
Why focus, again, on editorial?
I'm backing out of the
startups, focusing more
on the creation and the
interviewing and the research.
And I feel like that
is my Archimedes lever
for larger change.
And to give a precise example,
I've spent a lot of time
around lawmakers
and politicians.
I can't play that game.
I have too many skeletons
outside of my closet,
too many in my closet.
I use way too many drugs.
And I'm not good
at lying, which is
sort of a prerequisite for
that form of theater, at least
part of the time.
But what I've realized is if I
have a very well-educated, very
well-heeled, in some cases
influential audience,
I can help steer that ship from
afar, kind of like a football
coach calling commands
without actually having
to have my hands on the wheel.
I can influence it.
And I've used that already
to affect certain things,
like the legality of
shark fin importation
in a couple of
states in the US--
in the process of funding
research into using,
for instance,
psilocybin to address
treatment-resistant
depression at Johns Hopkins.
And those are experiments
that will ultimately
lead me to probably
change or attempt
to change laws and
policy because you can
be a chess piece on the board.
You can be the best
piece on the board, which
is better than being a pawn.
That's kind of where
we all start, I think.
Then you can be a chess player.
Then you can get very good.
Then you can be the
person who designs
the game in the first place.
And ultimately, in
that sort of cascade,
that's the most
powerful position.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
And then you change the game.
That's good.
TIM FERRISS: Yeah,
you change the game.
So I think that on a greatest
impact for the greatest
number of people, I don't want
to lose the one-to-one, which
is why the podcast and providing
people with things they can
start now, immediately start
using tomorrow or today,
is important to me.
That's the micro.
That can affect the macro.
But directly affecting
the chessboard
is something I want to do.
But I'm playing a long game with
that because to do it right,
I have to approach it
very, very methodically.
For me personally, I think
the most important thing
to me personally right
now is to be more--
and I am much better, but to
reflect more on what-- like,
to be happy with what I have
and to constantly reflect
on how fortunate I
am in so many ways
because if I don't do
that, nothing I get
will ever make me happy,
content, fulfilled.
And I'm really
good at achieving.
I can knock down walls.
I'm really good at it.
But that is only one side.
It's only one piece
of the whole equation.
And on top of
that, I would say--
and this is a twofer-- is
practicing and immersing
myself, recognizing that
I'm a social animal-- humans
are social animals-- so spending
a lot of time in groups.
That means mixed groups,
meaning mixed gender.
It also means, and this
is very out of favor
as a topic of conversation--
like small groups of men for me
and spending periods of
time in that environment.
It's just I find
it inexplicably,
in a way, therapeutic.
And I think that if you look
at our evolutionary biology,
you look at tribal societies--
my most recent podcast
with Sebastian Junger gets
into this quite a bit-- we're
in such a sensitive
political climate.
I'm not telling you to run
around and touch everybody.
But there's no physical contact.
And it's extremely, I
think, problematic for us
as organisms to live the
way we currently live.
So I think I need that.
And part and parcel of that is
developing greater compassion
and empathy, or
just rediscovering
that-- so long answer.
I apologize, guys.
But if I had to reflect
on it for me personally,
that would be--
AUDIENCE: Thank you.
Thanks.
It's good.
JORDAN THIBODEAU: We'll
do one on online question
and then one more
in-person question.
So for the online
question, you've
experimented with interview
structure of your podcast
a few times-- sharing a bottle
of wine with Astro Teller.
What has worked the best?
TIM FERRISS: Interview
format-- I've tried many things
in interview formats.
I've also tried non-interview
formats for the podcast.
And part of what is great
about treating things
as an experiment and being very
vocal about the fact that you
are doing that is
that you get hall
passes to do all sorts of
zany, hair-brained shit, which
is great.
So I've done the
wine-- no big surprise.
There's a tipping point
where wine makes you funnier
and then you just feel like
you're getting funnier,
but you're no longer funny.
There's definitely a point where
the whole scale flips on that.
But format-wise, what
I've found to work
very well with my guests
is at least an hour
and a half, up to three hours.
Once you get to
three, most people
just start running out of gas.
I break the interview generally
in my mind into thirds.
First third would be
developing rapport, offering
vulnerabilities of my own.
So if you hear me
offering stories of my own
in the beginning,
it's not because I
want it to be the
Tim Ferriss show,
even though it literally is.
I don't want it to
be just me talking.
I'm offering vulnerable pieces
so that they will reciprocate.
And that's something I
learned from Neil Strauss.
It works really well.
So I'm trying to crack the ice.
First third is basically getting
through some of their bio,
or not getting through-- it's
interesting stuff-- covering
some of their bio, current
projects, and breaking the ice,
and also getting through
some of their soundbites.
Second third would be audience
questions often times,
or questions informed
by the audience.
And then the tail end
of that second third
is whatever they want to
pitch or talk about or promote
if they have something.
Then rapid-fire questions
and sort my usual set.
And then the close.
And I find that structure
works very well for me.
In my experience, it
takes at least an hour--
sometimes more-- unless you
know the person already to get
through their usual shtick.
And if you do a
lot of media, as I
do-- I'm just as guilty
of this as anyone else--
we talked about preserving your
decision-making creativity hit
points.
One of the ways
you do that is you
figure out which stories
and answers work really well
and you just use those
over and over again.
But I want to get
original material.
So you have to
burn through that.
And it takes about an
hour, hour and a half.
And that's the general format.
There's a lot of prep that
goes into that, of course.
Other formats that
work very well
that I hadn't seen any other
podcast try-- but again,
asking the question, what would
this look like if it were easy?
I was like, man,
it's really hard
to schedule with these people.
These are really,
really busy people.
It's super hard to schedule.
What if I just had the
questions submitted and voted
on Reddit or Facebook or
somewhere and then took
the top 10, emailed
them, bought them
a mic-- ATR2100's my favorite
kind of all-purpose mic,
USB-- on Amazon Prime,
shipped it to them.
It's just like, you know what?
Record whatever you want.
We don't have to
schedule a time.
Just repeat the
question, the person
who asked it, and
then give the answer.
And some of those have turned
out spectacularly well.
Maria Popova of "Brain
Pickings" killed it so good.
Sam Harris killed
it just so, so good.
Some of them are better
than others, of course.
But there are quite a few
formats that work well.
I do like the wine.
But I've realized you've
got to segue into the wine,
like, halfway through
or you're going
to be really sloppy for the end.
So I think the Matt
Mullenweg episode
that I did where
we started with tea
and then segued to tequila,
for the second half,
that was a good format.
We didn't get too off the rails.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Worked out well.
AUDIENCE: In the many podcasts
and books that you've written,
you've done a tremendous amount
of individual experiments,
and so have your guests.
But my question is let's
get back to your tribe
here that you want.
Let's say if you have a
bunch of adult followers
and you want to
make your own tribe,
what would you
basically have them do,
whether it's for
their own betterment
or for your own personal
experimentation?
TIM FERRISS:
Meaning what would I
have them do for
the greater good,
or what would I have them do
to solidify their own tribe?
AUDIENCE: I mean
actually, like, let's just
say you have an adult
boot camp, you know?
TIM FERRISS: Yep.
AUDIENCE: You get
a group of people,
however-- let's
just say, I don't
know, 20 people or something
like that for 30 days.
And I'm kind of wondering
would you run an experiment
or would you--
TIM FERRISS: If I wanted them
to be as tight as possible?
If I wanted them to
be as tightly bonded?
AUDIENCE: Actually, that's
part of the question.
I guess what would
your goal be, because
like I said, for
their own betterment
or for your own experimentation?
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
If I had an adult boot camp with
20 people, I would have equal--
and this might come
off the wrong way--
but either equal numbers of
men and women, or just men.
And I would find someone
who's in my position who's
female to lead the equivalent
for women because I would like
to think I have
empathy, but I don't
have enough empathy
to understand
what it's like to be a woman.
I'm not a woman, last I checked.
So it could be
split, in which case
there'll be together
activities, but also
sort of gender-specific--
not gender-specific.
They'd be doing the
exact same thing.
They would just be
in different groups.
And the activities-- so
I wouldn't have a goal.
It wouldn't be like "Fight
Club" Operation Mayhem
at the end or anything.
I wouldn't have a single thing
for them to do afterwards.
Potentially-- actually,
I take that back.
There would be a lot of
hardship and suffering.
[LAUGHTER]
No, I'm serious.
There's too little productive
suffering in the US right now.
And it's like, oh, you got
27th place, here's a gold star.
No, that does not help anyone.
It really doesn't.
So getting good at
failing and overcoming it
and coming back from it--
that's the real world.
That's what I want
to train people
to be able to handle because
if they're used to fighting
each other in those
big blowup sumo suits
and they're like I'm awesome and
they go out and then get round
kicked in the head
by a UFC fighter,
they're just going to be like,
what the fuck just happened?
They won't be able
to recover from it.
So I would have
probably some element
of fasting because
most people are not
familiar with the true
sensation of being hungry.
I wasn't for decades-- really
hungry, not like, oh my god,
I'm grumpy, I'm
hangry, I haven't
had cashews in four hours.
No, like really hungry,
like you haven't
eaten in three days hungry.
And there would be an
element of fasting.
There would be an element of
physical discomfort or pain.
I'd probably have people
doing outdoor activities
like building debris
huts or something like
that-- no screens
whatsoever, no alarm clocks.
So for the first few days,
people would come in, decaf.
They would be titrating
off of caffeine.
And they would wake up
whenever they woke up,
like for the first time
maybe getting the actual rest
that they need in 10 years.
And I would spend
a lot of the time--
and this is straight
from Sebastian Junger.
I think he was talking
about what he would
do in ninth or 10th grade.
I would have people working on
projects, like small projects
that were very difficult.
And we would rotate in terms of
who was leading a given group.
So let's just say-- they'd
be small groups, maybe
like five groups of four.
Everybody would
have an opportunity
to sort of lead a project.
And it would not be
totally democratic at all.
I'd be like, OK, 1, 2, 3,
4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4.
OK, ones, raise your hand.
OK, you're the dictators.
That's it.
Everybody has to do
exactly what you said.
This is not a flat organization.
No.
You are like the platoon leader.
That's it-- or maybe
not the best analogy.
You're the dictator.
And every exercise would be
intended to put people out
of their comfort
zone physically,
emotionally,
psychologically, mentally so
that when they come
out the other end,
they are better at-- this
is probably the only part
that I might teach because
we'd do postmortems
on all of these-- would be
the ability to learn quickly
and the ability to
teach other people.
And my goal all
along in a way has
been to create a
benevolent army of people
who are expert learners--
incredibly high-level, top 1%
meta learners who can learn to
be better at anything I've done
who can then teach
people, in turn, to be
better than they are.
That seems like the right trend.
So I think that's-- I've
actually fantasized about this,
like adult boot camp thing.
AUDIENCE: Haven't we all?
TIM FERRISS: I've
fantasized about it a lot.
But it would just
be like camp pain.
It would just be
like-- but you look
at the successful like
Tough Mudder Spartan race.
There's actually a good doc
coming out soon-- I really
enjoyed it, I know the guy
who produced it-- called
the "Rise of the Sufferfests."
I think there's part of us that
really subconsciously yearns
to be tested.
Nobody's really tested these
days in a holistic way,
like a really painful way.
There's no rite of passage.
But I think we're programmed
to need that, to want that.
So I think the camp might
get pretty low reviews given
the amount of pain involved.
Or I'd just have a religious
following of masochists.
I don't know.
But I do fantasize about it.
But the goal would be
master meta learners
who have a high pain
tolerance, who've
expanded their sphere
of comfortable action,
and are really good at
helping other people to do
the same thing.
JORDAN THIBODEAU:
Well, Tim, thank
you very much for coming
and speaking to us--
really appreciate it.
TIM FERRISS: Yeah.
My pleasure.
[APPLAUSE]